---
title: Documentation:Advanced features
permalink: /Documentation:Advanced_features/
---

Hand-written mappings
=====================

Up to now, we have considered examples where the implementation of data-types is either predefined ( case), or generated by a tool ( case). One interesting contribution of is to be customizable. By defining a mapping between the signature formalism (`%typeterm`, `%op`, *etc.*) and the concrete implementation, it becomes possible to perform pattern matching against any data-structure and consider subtyping.

Defining a simple mapping
-------------------------

In this section, we consider that we have a library for representing tree based data structures. On another side, to be able to use , we consider the following abstract data-type:

``` tom
%typeterm Nat
%op Nat zero()
%op Nat suc(Nat)
```

By doing so, we have defined a sort (`Nat`), and two operators (`zero` and `suc`). When defining a mapping, the goal consists in explaining to Tom how the considered abstract data-type is implemented, and how a term (over this signature) can be de-constructed.

For expository reasons, the [ATerm](http://www.cwi.nl/htbin/sen1/twiki/bin/view/SEN1/ATermLibrary) library is the library used to implement terms. However, any other tree/term based library could have been used instead.

In order to define a correct mapping, we have to describe how the algebraic sort (`Nat` in our example) is implemented (by the `ATermAppl` class). This is done via the `implement` construct:

``` tom
%typeterm Nat {
  implement { ATermAppl }
}
```

The second part of the mapping definition consists in defining how the symbols (`zero` and `suc`) are represented in memory. This is done via the `is_fsym` construct:

``` tom
%op Nat zero() {
  is_fsym(t) { t.getName().equals("zero") }
}
%op Nat suc(pred:Nat) {
  is_fsym(t)       { t.getName().equals("suc") }
  get_slot(pred,t) { (ATermAppl)t.getArgument(0) }
}
```

In addition, `get_slot` describes how to retrieve a subterm of a term.

Given a term built over the ATerm library, it becomes possible to perform pattern matching as previously explained.

Using backquote constructs
--------------------------

When using the backquote construct (`‘suc(suc(zero))` for example), has to know how to build a term in memory. For this purpose, we consider an extension of the signature definition formalism: the `make` construct.

``` tom
%op Nat zero() {
  is_fsym(t) { t.getName().equals("zero") }
  make       { SingletonFactory.getInstance().makeAppl(
                 SingletonFactory.getInstance().makeAFun("zero",0,false)) }
}
%op Nat suc(pred:Nat) {
  is_fsym(t)       { t.getName().equals("suc") }
  get_slot(pred,t) { (ATermAppl)t.getArgument(0) }
  make(t)          { SingletonFactory.getInstance().makeAppl(
                       SingletonFactory.getInstance().makeAFun("suc",1,false),t) }
}
```

The `makeAFun` function has three arguments: the function name, the number of arguments and a boolean that indicates if the quotes are included in the function name or not.

Given this mapping, can be used as previously: the following function implements the addition of two Peano integers:

``` tom
public ATermAppl plus(ATermAppl t1, ATermAppl t2) {
  %match(t2) {
    zero() -> { return t1; }
    suc(y) -> { return `suc(plus(t1,y)); }
  }
  return null;
}
```

Advanced examples
-----------------

Let us suppose that we have a class `Person` with two getters (`getFirstname` and `getLastname`). In order to illustrate the signature definition formalism, we try to redefine (without using ) the abstract data type for the sort `Person`.

The first thing to do consists in defining the sort `Person`:

``` tom
%typeterm Person {
  implement { Person }
  is_sort(t) { t instanceof Person }
}
```

To avoid any confusion, we use the same name twice: the sort `Person` is implemented by the class `Person`. When declaring an operator, we defined the behavior as shown in the previous example:

``` tom
%op Person person(firstname:String, lastname:String) {
  is_fsym(t) { t instanceof Person }
  get_slot(firstname,t) { t.getFirstname() }
  get_slot(lastname,t) { t.getLastname() }
  get_default(firstname) { "Bob" }
  get_default(lastname) { "Doe" }
  make(t0, t1) {  new Person(t0, t1) }
}
```

In this example, we illustrate another possibility offered by : being able to know whether a term is rooted by a symbol without explicitly representing this symbol. The `is_fsym(t)` construct should return `true` when the term `t` is rooted by the algebraic operator we are currently defining. In this example, we say that the term `t` is rooted by the symbol `person` when the object `t` is implemented by an instance of the class `Person`. By doing so, we do not explicitly represent the symbol `person`, even if it could have been done via the reflective capabilities of (by using `Person.getClass()` for example).

We also introduce the `get_default(t)` optionnal construct in this example. It allows to set a default value to one or several fields of the operator. Then, those default values can be used as follow:

``` tom
//use of lastname default value
//explicit notation
Person p1 = `person[firstname="John"];
//implicit notation
Person p2 = `person("John",_);

//use of firstname default value
Person p3 = `person[lastname="Dylan"];

//use of all default values
Person p4 = `person(_,_);
```

Using subtyping
---------------

In this section, we show how to describe a type hierarchy between declared sorts.

Assuming the sort `Person` defined above and supposing that we have a class `Woman` with three getters (`getFirstname`, `getLastname` and `getLastsinglename`), we define the sort `Woman`:

``` tom
%typeterm Woman extends Person {
  implement { Woman }
  is_sort(t) { t instanceof Woman }
}
```

Once more we use the same name twice: the sort `Woman` is implemented by the class `Woman` which extends the class `Person`. We propagate this subtype relation in by declaring that `Woman` is a subsort of (i.e. extends) `Person`. Note that, as in , multiple inheritance is not allowed in since a sort can not be defined twice. The supertypes of a sort are obtained by reflexive and transitive closure over the direct supertype relation.

When declaring the operator `Woman`, we define its behavior:

``` tom
%op Woman woman(firstname:String, lastname:String, lastsinglename:String) {
  is_fsym(t) { t instanceof Woman}
  get_slot(firstname,t) { t.getFirstname() }
  get_slot(lastname,t) { t.getLastname() }
  get_slot(lastsinglename,t) { t.getLastsinglename() }
  make(t0, t1, t2) {  new Woman(t0, t1, t2) }
}
```

Given this mapping, when considering a subject of sort `Person` is able to match patterns having the same sort `Person` or a subsort as `Woman`:

``` tom
public void print(Person p) {
  %match(p) {
    woman(first,last,lastsingle)-> {
      if (`last != `lastsingle) {
        System.out.println("woman"+ `last + " " + `first + " is married.");
      }
    }
    person(first,last) -> {
      System.out.println("person "+ `last + " " + `first);
    }
  }
}
```

Using list-matching
-------------------

In this section, we show how to describe a mapping for associative operators.

``` tom
%typeterm TomList {
  implement { ArrayList }
  equals(l1,l2)      { l1.equals(l2) }
}
```

Assuming that the sort `Element` is already defined, we can use the `%oparray` construct to define an associative operator. We also have to explain to how to compute the size of a list, and how to access a given element. This is done via `get_size` and `get_element` constructs:

``` tom
%oparray TomList conc( Element* ) {
  is_fsym(t)       { t instanceof ArrayList }
  get_element(l,n) { (ATermAppl)l.get(n) }
  get_size(l)      { l.size() }
  make_empty(n)    { myEmpty(n) }
  make_append(e,l) { myAdd(e,(ArrayList)l) }
}
```

This construct is similar to `%op` except that additional information have to be given: how to build an empty list (`make_empty`), and how to add an element to a given list (`make_append`). The auxiliary functions are defined as follows:

``` tom
private static ArrayList myAdd(Object e,ArrayList l) {
  l.add(e);
  return l;
}
private static ArrayList myEmpty(int n) {
  ArrayList res = new ArrayList(n);
  return res;
}
```

Usually, we use an associative operator to represent (in a abstract way) a list data structure. There are many ways to implement a list, but the two most well-known are the use of array based list, and the use of linked-list. The previously described mapping shows how to map an abstract list to an array based implementation.

offers another similar construct `%oplist` to map an associative operator to a linked-list based implementation. When using the ATerm library for example, a possible implementation could be:

``` tom
%typeterm TomTerm {
  implement { aterm.ATermAppl }
  equals(t1, t2)     { t1==t2 }
}
%typeterm TomList {
  implement { ATermList }
  equals(l1,l2) { l1==l2 }
}
%oplist TomList conc( TomTerm* ) {
  is_fsym(t) { t instanceof aterm.ATermList }
  make_empty()  { aterm.pure.SingletonFactory.getInstance().makeList() }
  make_insert(e,l) { l.insert(e) }
  get_head(l)   { (aterm.ATermAppl)l.getFirst() }
  get_tail(l)   { l.getNext() }
  is_empty(l)   { l.isEmpty() }
}
```

[Category:Documentation](/Category:Documentation "wikilink")